Light

I.

  Until the glorious Sun hath vanquished Night,
  The Birds of Day cower trembling with affright.
      But lo! a bright glance bids the Tulip ope;
  O Heart, awake thou too, in Duty's might.
      The Sun's Sword sheds in reddening flush of Dawn
  The Blood of Night, and puts the Foe to flight.
      The Soul still full of sleep, dreams Night prevails;
  But no! Day comes, and triumphs full in sight.
      While grey Dawn lingers, dubious yet is Day;
  But in Day's glow, who still can doubt the Light.
      The Light grows in the East; I in the West
  On Mountain top, reflect the Morn's delight.
      To Beauty's Sun, I'm but the pale moon here;
  Then look from me towards the Sun's face bright.
      The Light in East is called JELÁLEDDÍN[24];
  And here my verse reflects its glowing White.

[24] The Splendour of the Faith.


Death and Life

II.

  Death endeth sure Life's need and pain;
  Yet Life in fear would Death restrain.
      Life only sees dark Death's dread Hand,
  Not that bright Cup it offered plain.
      So shrinks from Love the tender Heart,
  As if from threat of being slain.
      But when true Love awakens, dies
  The Self, that despot dark and vain.
      Then let him die in Night's black hour,
  And freely breathe in Dawn again.


Invocation

III.

  Soul of mine, thou dawning Light: Be not far, O be not far!
  Love of mine, thou Vision bright: Be not far, O be not far!
  Life is where thou smilest sweetly; Death is in thy parting look;
  Here mid Death and Life's fierce fight: Be not far, O be not far!
  I am East when thou art rising; I am West when thou dost set;
  Bring Heaven's own radiant hues to sight: Be not far, O be not far!
  See how well my Turban fitteth, yet the Parsee Girdle binds me;
  Cord and Wallet I bear light: Be not far, O be not far!
  True Parsee and true Brahman, a Christian, yet a Mussulman;
  Thee I trust, Supreme by Right: Be not far, O be not far!
  In all Mosques, Pagodas, Churches, I do find One Shrine alone;
  Thy Face is there my sole delight: Be not far, O be not far!
  Thine the World's all-loving Heart; and for it I yearn and pray;
  O take not from my Heart thy flight: Be not far, O be not far!
  Thee, the World's Eternal Centre, here I circle round in prayer;
  Thy absence is last judgment quite: Be not far, O be not far!
  Thine, Judgment Day and Blessedness: Mine is Bliss when Thou art nigh;
  Keep me circling in thy Might: Be not far, O be not far!
  Fair World Rose, O blossom forth; sweet Heart-buds unfold in Love;
  Put on the longing Soul's pure White: Be not far, O be not far!
  O Rose, hear through Night's silence, how he thrills—thy Nightingale;
  As if I did his Notes indite: Be not far, O be not far!
  JELÁLEDDÍN, all loving, let Love's Heart resist no more:
  Hear him chaunting, Day and Night: Be not far, O be not far!


Faith

IV.

  All Unbelief is Midnight, but Faith the Night-Lamp's glow;
  Then see that no Thief cometh to steal thy Lamp when low.
  Our Hope is for the Sunlight, from which the Lamp did shine;
  The Light from which it kindled, still feeds its flame below.
  But when the Sun hath risen, both Night and Lamp go out;
  And Unbelief and Faith then, the higher Vision know.
  O Night! Why art thou dreaming? O Lamp! Why flickerest so?
  The swift Sun-horses panting, from East their fire-foam throw.
  'Tis Night still in the shadow; the village Lamp burns dim;
  But in Dawn's Splendour towering, the Peaks Heaven's Glory show.


Dawn

V.

  The Day has dawned, thy festal Day, O Rose;
  Our cheeks all glow in thy bright Ray, O Rose.
      Love was the Gardener of the Rose-bed there;
  And now thy Flower blooms forth all gay, O Rose.
      When Herald Breezes blew: _The Rose!_ the Flowers
  Kneeling to thee glad Homage pay, O Rose.
      The Tulips danced; the Lilies, drinking there,
  Their brightest hues to thee display, O Rose.
      The Cypress whispered to the Ivy: Wake!
  Why dream'st thou, Child? She dreamed thy Play, O Rose;
      The Nightingale a thousand long nights through
  But trilled thy own sweet Melody, O Rose.
      The Heavens more fair assume thy radiant form,
  But thou outviest their Phantasy, O Rose.
      The Rose a message brings from Paradise
  Where Souls for thee all eager stay, O Rose.
      The Rose brings greeting to the Soul from Home;
  The Soul forgets thee not for aye, O Rose.
      The Rose unfolds the Sign of Beauty there:
  God's Seal Himself the Poets say, O Rose.
      The Soul crowns all Man's festal Cup of Joy;
  That he with thee may breathe Life's May, O Rose.
      The Rose is twined in all Life's gladdest Bonds,
  That Love from Man ne'er flee away, O Rose.
      Be closed in Buds thy Lips; but there let shine
  The Smile that ever in thee lay, O Rose.


Allah Hu!

VI.

  Sound Drum and mellow Flute, resounding: ALLAH HU[25]!
  Dance, ruddy Dawn, in Gladness bounding: ALLAH HU!
      Sun exalted in the Centre, O thou streaming Light;
  Soul of all wheeling Planets rounding: ALLAH HU!
      O Hearts! O Worlds! how soon your Dancing all would stop,
  Did not His Power sustain astounding! ALLAH HU!
      Love mazy, winding, changing, all embraces,
  The Night, the Dawn, the Day, resounding: ALLAH HU!
      Boom, Sea! on Shore, and Rock, thy Music praising God;
  O Nightingale to Rose trill, sounding: ALLAH HU!
      O Soul, what if one Star should falter in the Dance?
  His Will is Order ever founding: ALLAH HU!
      Who knows Love's mazy circling, ever lives in God;
  For Death, he knows, is Love abounding: ALLAH HU!

[25] HE is GOD.


Spring

VII.

  O Eyes, go forth the Spring to view,
  That smiles upon our Plains anew.
      A Heavenly Child in cradling Flowers,
  Sweet Breath from Skies unclouded drew.
      The Morning Breeze his Nurse, that rocked
  His Cradle, with soft Lullings due.
      The Baby feigns to sleep, and blinks,
  Shutting his little Eyelids two.
      And when the Lids are oped again,
  The Eyebrows drip with sparkling Dew.
      The Bees hum round and busy sip
  The Nectar, and make Honey new.
      O come, and let the Baby's smiles
  And Laughter, pierce thee through and through.
      O come, and leave your wintry Cell,
  And let Heaven's Light thy Life renew.
      And build new Cells with honey'd Wax,
  Plann'd like the Bees' six-sided, true.
      And warmed by radiant Fire of Flowers,
  Old Winter's reign of Death undo.
      Regret is dead; Love lives again;
  New Life transforms the Landscape's Hue.
      Bold enter, then, green Spring's loved Haunts,
  And drink fresh Wine, nor fear to rue.
      And drinking full Love's sweetest Draught,
  The glowing Heart new Love shall woo.
      Love wakes afresh in Earth and Heaven;
  The Rose in green, the Sun in blue.
      O Nightingale, behold thy Rose!
  O Eagle, thy bright Sun pursue!


Spring's Festival

VIII.

  Our Fasting is over; 'tis Spring's festal Day: Hallelu!
  O dearest Guest welcome, all Sorrow's away: Hallelu!
  O Love once forsaken, forsaken Heart now be forsaken;
  Thy loved One has come, and for ever will stay: Hallelu!
  The Parting is parted; the Sev'rance at last is all sever'd;
  The Union united, without more delay: Hallelu!
  The Flight is now flown off; the Banishment's pain is now banished;
  All distant the Distance; our Bird Nest all gay: Hallelu!
  The Moon in the Heavens, the Rose in the Heart, in Love's Garden;
  The King in his Palace, proud Banners display: Hallelu!
  Life stirs in the Rootlet; soft Sap in the Leaflet is spreading;
  Green Buds on the Branches are crowning his Sway: Hallelu!
  Let come our Foe hated, for now will he meet our Defender;
  We scorn and defy him, all safe now for aye: Hallelu!
  Yea, flood me all over, all over with Fire of Love burning;
  Now well can I bear it; I'll ne'er burn away: Hallelu!
  And now it is certain my Soul is bound up in Salvation;
  And all of Earth's sadness is sunk in Earth's clay: Hallelu!
  O Chalice full brimming, poured out for the thirst of the worlds;
  We thank thee, we bless thee, and drink while we pray: Hallelu!
  Long parch'd lay the World, a Desert profane, till thy Breath came
  On Wings of the Morning, when bright the Dew lay: Hallelu!
  We longed as we waited for Spring's Sun our Life to renew;
  JELÁLEDDÍN'S warm Breath from East came to-day: HALLELU!


Dependence

IX.

  I am the Vine; Strong Elm, O give me leave,
  All round thee my fond Tendrils now to weave.
      I am the Ivy; be my Cedar Trunk,
  That I no more to Earth's damp soil may cleave.
      I am the Bird; O come, be my light Wings,
  That soaring I yon azure Heaven retrieve.
      I am the Steed; O come and be my spur,
  That quick the Victor Goal may me receive.
      I am the Rosebud; O be my own Rose,
  That gaudy Earth-weeds ne'er my Heart deceive.
      I am the East; then rise in me, O Sun,
  Flame up in Light, and all my Pain relieve.
      I am the Night; O be my Starry Crown,
  That in Life's darkness I nor fear, nor grieve.


Mystical Union

X.

  With Thy sweet Soul, this Soul of mine—
  Hath mixed as Water doth with Wine.
      Who can the Wine and Water part,
  Or me and Thee when we combine?
      Thou art become my greater Self;
  Small Bounds no more can me confine.
      Thou hast my Being taken on,
  And shall not I now take on Thine?
      Me Thou for ever hast affirmed,
  That I may ever know Thee mine.
      Thy Love has pierced me through and through,
  Its Thrill with Bone and Nerve entwine.
      I rest a Flute laid on Thy Lips;
  A Lute I on Thy Breast recline.
      Breathe deep in me that I may sigh;
  Yet strike my Strings, and Tears shall shine.
      So sweet my Tears, my Sighs so sweet,
  I to the World its Joys resign.
      Thou restest in my inmost Soul
  Whose depths the mirror'd Heaven define.
      O Pearl in my Mussel Shell:
  O Diamond in my darkest Mine!
      My Honey is in Thee dissolved;
  O Milk of Life, so mild, so fine!
      Our Sweetnesses all blent in Thee,
  Give infant Lips their Smiles benign.
      Thou crushest me to Drops of Rose;
  Nor 'neath the Press do I repine.
      In Thy sweet Pain is Pain forgot;
  For I, Thy Rose, had this design.
      Thou bad'st me blossom on Thy Robe,
  And mad'st me for all eyes Thy Sign.
      And when Thou pour'st me on the World,
  It blows in Beauty, all Divine.


Identity

XI.

  Although thy Brightness glistens in the Sun, indeed;
  Yet is my Light with thine all radiant, One, indeed!
  Thou mad'st of Dust all glitt'ring the circling Heavens above;
  Yet will with mine thy Spirit ne'er Union shun, indeed!
  To Dust return the Heavens; again Heavens spring from Dust;
  Yet hast thou in my Being thy own Life spun, indeed!
  Now have the Words Eternal that through Heaven's vastness ring,
  Found Home in human Bosom, and dearer none, indeed!
  Thou hast the Sunbeams hidden, that in the Diamond glow,
  Deep, deep in Earth's dark Chambers, a Wonder done, indeed!
  See, though in vile Soil feeding, and drinking filthy slime,
  To yon Rose peerless Beauty, in Love, hath run, indeed!
  O Heart, and be it thou swimmest in Flood, or glow'st in Fire,
  The same are Fire and Flood: Be pure, my Son, indeed!
  O MEVLANA, at Morning I woke, and found with thee,
  My Eyes from Tears all brighten'd, and Heaven now won, indeed!


Confession

XII.

  O LOVE, to thee I own, I wept in Night's dark Thought;
  But now thy radiant Sun to me hath bright Day brought.
  O SOUL of my own Soul, my I as I am Thou:
  Thou art the All, and I in thee have all I sought.
  Thou art Life's Sweetness self, Intoxication full,—
  The brimming Sea of Pearls, the Gold to pureness wrought.
  Whoe'er approaches thee, must first his Soul resign;
  He dies beneath thy frown, lives when thy Smile is caught.
  Thy Favour thrills in fear the trembling Lover's heart,
  Till comes thy Wrath and smites his Weakness into Naught.


Discordia Concors

XIII.

  I saw how Sunward soaring, an Eagle cleaved the air;
  And how in Shadow sitting, there coo'd a Turtle pair.
  I saw how o'er the Heavens, the Clouds in Herds rush'd wild;
  And how close round the Shepherd the Lambkins gather'd fair.
  I heard the Stars all asking: When shall we rise again?
  And Buds in Seedlings folded sigh: Doth Love for us care?
  I saw a Grass blade blossom at Morn and fade at Night;
  While Cedars braved a thousand Years the Tempests raging there.
  I saw old Ocean's Billows like Kings all crowned with foam,
  Then flung from Rocks, down fallen, like Penitents in Prayer.
  I saw a Dewdrop sparkling, nor did it Danger dread;
  But, soon consumed, it vanish'd, that sun-bright Jewel rare.
  I saw close crowding Mankind new Towns and Castles rear;
  And swarming Ants heaped Hillocks up, with Winter's garner'd fare.
  I saw the Warhorse prancing and trampling golden Grain;
  And all his Hoofs were redden'd with the Blood of Love's Despair.
  I saw the Winter weaving from Flakes a Robe of Death;
  And the Spring found Earth in Mourning, all naked, lone and bare.
  I heard Time's Loom a-whirring that wove the Sun's dim Veil;
  I saw a Worm a-weaving in Life-threads its own Lair.
  I saw the Great was Smallest, and saw the Smallest Great;
  For God had set His Likeness on all the Things that were.


Renovation

XIV.

  Come, O Springtide of my Love: the World, again, make New!
  Light in Heaven and Flowers on Earth, o'er Hill and Plain, make New!
  With the blue gleaming Sun-gem, set thy new green Turban on;
  And o'er the Fields all verdant, thy floral Train, make New!
  Paint Meadows fresh with bright Buds, let Hedgerows sprout once more;
  Rose Breast-Knots, slender Lilies in bathing Rain, make New!
  Melt with thy warm Breath Winter's iced Coat and frozen Spear;
  With tender Smile shame Hatred; Peace, ending Pain, make New!
  The Air pines for thy Whisper, and the Rose's Breath is faint;
  Then from Slumber rouse thy Zephyrs, and the feather'd Vane, make New!
  Roll, Thunder, pour thy Bounty adown from bursting Cloud;
  Now bathe from Head to Foot free, and Death's Disdain, make New!
  Strike, Pine, upon the Wind-drum! O Plane-tree, clap thy Hands!
  Brooding Love, the dreamy birth Down on feather'd Train, make New!
  Vines, twine around the Elm Trees, God's Glory showing fair;
  While Violets kiss the soft Sod, Spring's sweet Hymn-strain, make New!
  Hyacinths the Tulips fondle; woos Rose the Nightingale.
  While Turtles coo in low Notes, my Song's Refrain, make New!
  Kindle Altar-fire in Blossoms, in Fragrance Incense burn;
  The Pan Pipes that in dead Grass, long have silent lain, make New!
  Let Leaves shoot quivering Tongues out, Love's Questionings in Play;
  And whisp'ring to each other, Love's Wrangling vain, make New.
  Hark! How the Morning Breezes, at rosy Dawn all call:
  Up! Up! O Friend, 'tis Spring-time: the Soul's glad Reign, make New!
  Behold the Spring in Glory! O thou Alchemist of Flowers,
  Smelt the fiery Glow to Blossoms; our World, again, make New!


Revolving in Mystic Dance

XV.

  Come! Come! Thou art the Soul, the Soul so dear, Revolving!
  Come! Come! Thou art the Cedar, the Cedar's Spear, Revolving!
      O Come! The Well of Light up-bubbling springs;
  And Morning Stars exult, in Gladness sheer, Revolving!
      Of the o'er-arching Heavens, the Highest is the Seventh;
  But over all thou stretchest, bright, and clear, Revolving!
      In warmest Arms of Love thou hold'st me clasped,
  And thee I hold enclasped, soft breathing, near, Revolving!
      In Sunbeams dance the Motes, by Sunlight grasped,
  O Sunlight, grasping me, dispel my Fear, Revolving!
      The Motes dance mute, yet telling all of Love;
  O silent Love! Teach me thy own Dance here, Revolving!


The Soul in All

XVI.

  A mote I in the Sunshine, yet am the Sun's vast Ball;
  I bid the Sun spread Sunlight, and make the Mote be small.
  I am the Morning Splendour; I am the Evening Breeze;
  I am the Leaf's soft Rustle; the Billow's Rise and Fall.
  I am the Mast and Rudder, the Steersman and the Ship;
  I am the Cliff out-jutting, the Reef of Coral Wall.
  I am the Bird Ensnarer, the Bird and Net as well;
  I am both Glass and Image; the Echo and the Call.
  I am the Tree and Branches, and all the Birds thereon;
  I am both Thought and Silence, Tongues' Speech, and Ocean Squall.
  I am the Flute when piping, and Man's Soul breathing breath;
  I am the sparkling Diamond, and Metals that enthrall.
  I am the Grape enclustered, the Wine-press and the Must;
  I am the Wine, Cup-bearer, and crystal Goblet tall.
  I am the Flame and Butterfly, which round it circling flits;
  I am the Rose and Nightingale, the Rose's Passioned Thrall.
  I am the Cure and Doctor, Disease and Antidote;
  I am the Sweet and Bitter, the Honey and the Gall.
  I am the War and Warrior, the Victor and the Field;
  I am the City peaceful, the Battle and the Brawl.
  I am the Brick and Mortar, the Builder and the Plan,
  I am the Base and Gable, new House and ruined Hall.
  I am the Stag and Lion, the Lamb and black-maw'd Wolf;
  I am the Keeper of them, who shuts them in one Stall.
  I am the Chain of Beings, the Ring of circling Worlds;
  The Stages of Creation, where'er it rise or fall.
  I am what is and is not; I am—O Thou who know'st,
  Jeláleddín, O tell it—I AM the SOUL in All!


Responsibility

XVII.

  O thou who hast come safely, into this Being's Land;
  Strange, thou thyself not knowest, how thou didst reach its Strand.—
  Straight from the great Shah's Chamber, thou cam'st to Being's Town,
  Sent here to do the Business which he himself had planned.
  The Lord gave, then, to prove thee, Capacity to do;
  And as entrusted Capital, thy Sum of Life in hand.
  How has the Market's Turmoil confused thy Sense and Brain;
  That thou the Pledge entrusted, can yet not understand?
  O cease to dream and rouse thee; and do thy Duty well;
  Buy choicest Pearls more wisely, and give not Gold for Sand.
  When thou to Home returnest, thou'lt see Him sitting there;
  Thy Lord with His Book open, and His own faithful Band.
  He will hold count, and reckon all that Himself did give;
  And ask how thou did'st use it, when under His Command.
  And then will come His Blessing, or Curse, both just and sure,
  According as thy Credit, or thy Debt, summed up shall stand.


Action

XVIII.

  Awake! 'Tis Day! Rise up, O Youthful Mussulman!
  Pack quick thy Goods and Baggage, and catch the Caravan.
      O List! I hear it coming, 'twill sweep past while you sleep;
  Hark! Tinkling Bells are calling to come, while come you can.
  When once the Desert Sand-storm has o'er the Foot-prints blown,
  You them will find no longer, however close you scan.
  Up! Brace yourself for Action, as a Man all prompt and bold;
  And waste not Life fond, dreaming, in idlesse, pining, wan.
  Think of your noble Forbears, the gallant Youth of old;
  Of Rustum, bravest Hero; of Sal, the Pehlevan.[26]
  Be, too, of Right the Champion, Knight of the spotless Sun!
  Fall not a Prey to Darkness, o'erthrown by Ahriman.
  When once in struggle valiant, the earthly Soul is slain,
  The Heavenly Soul bears proudly Life's Banner in the Van.
  When thou thyself hast conquered, and triumphed in the Fight;
  A diamond Ring thou'lt ever shine, in our Lord Shah's Divan.

[26] Pehlevan, _i.e._ of the old heroic Age. 'Rustum, the "Hercules" of
Persia, and Zál his Father, whose exploits are among the most celebrated
in the Sháhnáma' (Fitzgerald). Compare Matthew Arnold's 'Sohrab and
Rustum. An Episode.'


Bondage

XIX.

  Complain not that in Chains, thou here art firmly bound;
  Complain not that Earth's Yoke, doth crush thee to the Ground.
  Complain not that the World is but a Prison wide;
  'Tis only thy complainings that build thy Dungeon round.
  And ask not how Life's Riddle will finally unfold;
  For soon without thy asking, unfolded 'twill be found.
  Say not Love has forsaken or yet forgotten thee;
  Love ne'er has Man forsaken; thy Words all falsely sound.
  Nor tremble when Death dreaded appears in Terror's Form;
  He falls before the Hero, who is with Courage crowned.
  Ne'er chase the Phantom, Pleasure; for like a hungry Lion,
  'Twill turn and rend in pieces the Hunter most renowned.
  Throw not thyself in Fetters; else will Men sternly say:
  Complain not of thy Fetters; for thou thyself hast bound.


Love's Freedom

XX.

  O Bird, that freest to Freedom win;
  Love caged thee in that Prison thin.
      O Soul, if thou, too, wouldst be free,
  Then love the Love that shuts thee in.
      'Tis Love that twisteth every Snare;
  'Tis Love that snaps the Bond of Sin.
      Love sounds the Music of the Spheres;
  Love echoes through Earth's harshest Din.
      Love fills with Fragrance Heaven's sweet Air;
  Love's deft Hands Life's gold Fibres spin.
      The World is God's pure Mirror clear,
  To Eyes when free from Clouds within.
      With Love's own Eyes the Mirror view,
  And there see God to Self akin.
      Then praise Him, Soul, enflamed with Love
  As Larks in Dawn, new Songs begin.


In My Heart

XXI.

  O, what a Throb of Toil is in my Heart!
  What Shrine's crowd-trodden Soil is in my Heart!
      The Spring has come; again the Sower sows,
  And all the Season's Moil is in my Heart.
      The Veil which hid the World's fair face is drawn;
  Disclosed, its inmost Coil is in my Heart.
      The Heart must higher rise, than setting Suns;
  The Sun-dance nought can foil is in my Heart.
      The Heart has well been named the Shah's own throne;
  And warm anointing Oil is in my Heart.
      The Heart's deep Ocean rolls a thousand waves;
  And rich Pearl-diver's Spoil is in my Heart.
      Jeláleddín! The Heart is sure both Mine and Mint;
  For Fire, as Gold did boil, is in my Heart.


Not Deaf to Love

XXII.

  O Brother hear! Be deaf no more, to Love:
  Thy heart now open to its Core, to Love!
      Hast thou in Pride, all vain, upraised thy Head?
  Come bend it now down to the Floor, to Love.
      In Dust thou shalt new living Grace receive,
  As Spring awakes the Landscape frore, to Love.
      And once thou hast put on Love's Leaves and Flowers,
  Comes golden Fruit in Autumn hoar, to Love.
      And when thou fadest sere, then burn thyself;
  And give thy Ashes, all Earth bore, to Love.
      And wing'd, from Ashes wilt thou fairer rise;
  And with Love's highest Message soar, to Love.


Assimilation

XXIII

  New Sword from Maker's Hand, in Edge and Point all bright;
  See that in dirty Scabbard, it rust not, out of Sight!
  Gold that in Miser's Coffer, in Blackness meanly lay,
  Upon the Shah's Throne gleaming, becomes a World's Delight.
  When full Clouds pour the Rain-drops, lo! every glad Tree drinks;
  Fruits redden on the Apple tree, as Leaves grow pale in Fright.
  This Stalk an empty Pipe still, in that sweet Sugar swells;
  Yet both did sip the same Tank, at Morning, Noon, and Night.
  One Deer distils perfumed Musk, another bitterest Gall,
  Yet grazed together, side by side, upon the self-same Height.
  Two creeping Worms together fed upon the same green Leaf;
  One spins mere useless Theadlets, the other Silk aright.
  The Bee's Lip, and the Snake's sucked from the self-same Flower;
  The one made Honey's Sweetness, the other Poison's Bite.
  One dines, and all his Nutriment transmutes to Life divine;
  Another's Food is souring to Hatred and to Spite.
  One's Eyes drink Light till blinded; the other stores it up,
  And glows in rosy Brightness, Love-robed in red and white.
  Be pure in all thy Members, and from Nature's golden Tree
  Pluck God's own Blessing daily, and grow in Manhood's Might.


Cleanliness

XXIV.

  Clean be kept thy Garment, and
  Clean be kept thy Mouth and Hand.
      Clean thy Garment from false Gawds
  Clean from all Earth's Filth thy Hand.
      Clean thy Heart from earthly Spite;
  Clean thy Lips from Greed's Demand.
      Outer Threshhold ever clean,
  Clean within let all Things stand.
      House all clean, might entertain
  Angel from the Heavenly Land.
      Clean the Food, and clean the cup,
  Clean the Wall from smoking Brand.
      Son! Thy outward Cleanliness
  Pledge of inward is, when scanned.
      Clean let Hand and Mouth be kept;
  Clean thy Garment's every Strand.


Where is He?

XXV.

  I ask all I meet: Where is He?
  In me incomplete: Where is He?
      The Tree of my Thought stretch'd on high,
  Reach'd not to His Seat: Where is He?
      I ask of the Wanderers by Day:
  My loved One, most sweet, Where is He?
      I ask of the Keepers of Vines:
  My loved One, most sweet, Where is He?
      I rush through the Woods and the Fields,
  And ask the Stag fleet: Where is He?
      At Night when in Darkness He hides,
  In Fear I repeat: Where is He?
      I ask of the Sun and the Moon,
  And Stars in retreat: Where is He?
      He is not with me. Who has seen
  The Path of His Feet? Where is He?
      O Master, if thou hast Him found,
  O tell, I entreat: Where is He?


Love's Slavery

XXVI.

  Come, and be Love's willing Slave;
  Thee Love's Slavery will save.
      Leave the Slavery of the World,
  Take Love's Service, sweet and brave.
      The Free, the World makes enslaved;
  Aye to Slaves, Love Freedom gave.
      As the Bird freed from the Egg,
  From the World release I crave.
      Free me from the Shell that clings;
  Give me Life as from the Grave.
      O Love, the Quail in Spring's Free Fields,
  In Songs of wildest Joy must rave.


Psyche in Tears

XXVII.

  Psyche sits, and lovelier seems;
  Ah! she of her Lover dreams!
      Still his Kiss she softly feels;
  Still his Smile in Fancy gleams.
      But in Light she fain would see
  Love's own Self, nor wrong it deems.
      Trembling her white Hand hath ta'en
  Lamp to light, as Fancy schemes.
      There by flickering Flame she scans
  Beauty which she Heaven esteems.
      But the fluttering Oil did shake,
  Shamed to find eclipsed its Beams.
      Fell one hot Drop on Love's Hand:
  Oh! the Lover waken'd screams!
      Love light-pinion'd flies away;
  Psyche's Wings, Tears drench in Streams.


Substitutional

XXVIII.

  Where the cleansing Water fails,
  Sand, as Substitute, avails.
      This, at Need, the Prophet gave;
  And his Rule to-day prevails.
      Know ye, O Believers, why?
  Hear the Truth the Sage unveils.—
      The Desert oft no Water shows,
  But never Sand the Traveller fails.
      From the Desert I will guide
  Him who me as Leader hails.
      To where living Waters flow,
  To the Garden Love empales.
      Bathe there in Abundance full,
  Where no hostile Drought assails.
      Full, that Stream Bath, now enjoy'd,
  Freedom from Sand Bath entails.
      So from Formulas made free,
  Spirit Life o'er all prevails.—
      Master! Thy high Soul hath seen
  Truth through all its hiding Veils.


God's Throne

XXIX.

  Unto your Fathers, Allah did make known
  This which they handed down and made your own,—
      That all who pray My Face may clearly see,
  I sit exalted high on Heaven's great Throne.
      As I in Heaven, so you I place on Earth,
  That I in my Vicegerents, may be shown.
      Serve Me then, that the World may serve you too
  Made to do good—this is your End alone.
      The World was fitly made to help you well:
  No Traitors be; let all my Justice own.
      And glorify the Maker of the World,
  Until the Rose of Peace hath round you blown.


The Lion of God

XXX.

  Fairest Flower beneath the Skies:
      Ali Abutaleb's Son!
  Fairest Flower in Paradise:
      Ali Abutaleb's Son!
  God's brave Lion, lamb-like, gentle,
      Clearest Mirror, ever bright:
  Pure in Faith, without Disguise:
      Ali Abutaleb's Son!
  Next the Prophet is thy Place,
      All his Splendour flashing round:
  Thy bright Light too floods our Eyes:
      Ali Abutaleb's Son!
  By Renouncing, daring Soul,
      And by braving Danger too:
  Thou hast won the Hero's Prize:
      Ali Abutaleb's Son!
  Straight thy Strength of Soul and Limb
      Bore thee to the thickest Fight:
  Death thy giant Thews despise:
      Ali Abutaleb's Son!
  All the Paths we tread to-day,
      Thou hast traced them, Son of Light!
  Let on us thy Beams arise:
      Ali Abutaleb's Son!
  Leader, Guide, and Champion true,
      Ever foremost in the Van:
  Where thou leadest, Honour lies:
      Ali Abutaleb's Son!
  Maulānā, in Hymn of Praise
      Thee I laud, Jeláleddín!
  Even as thou praisest wise,
      Ali Abutaleb's Son!


Self-Realisation

XXXI.

  When I knew myself a Thorn, soft Rose-buds' Swell
                                      I sought for then;
  When I saw myself all bitter, sweet Honey's Cell
                                      I sought for then.
  When I saw myself all Poison, I quaffed Life's Stream
                                      as Antidote;
  When I saw myself Lees turbid, Wine's clear Foam Bell
                                      I sought for then.
  When I saw myself all sour Fruit, I caught the ripening
                                      Sunbeams' Glow;
  When I saw myself droop feebly, the breezy Fell
                                      I sought for then.
  When I saw myself all blinded, the healing Power
                                      of Jesus' Hand;
  When I knew it could the Darkness from my Eyes dispel
                                      I sought for then.[27]
  Love's Touch became my Eyesalve, and all my Soul's
                                      dull Blindness fled;
  And, my Heart of Thirst a-dying, His sweet, pure Well
                                      I sought for then.
  I am Fire that never burneth; and thou, the Wind
                                      that makes it burn;
  O thou Wind, with my Fire playing, aye in me dwell:
                                      I sought for then.

[27] Rückert avoids the name of Jesus; not so Von Hammer.


Thy Hand!

XXXII.

  Lord, that I thee may find, O stretch to me thy Hand!
  Close-clasped for ever, kind, O stretch to me thy hand!
      O'er Earth it gathers dark, and ever deeper here
  Where dim cross Footpaths wind, O stretch to me thy Hand!
      The Malice of the World and deadly Hate I know;
  Where the Danger grows defined, O stretch to me thy Hand!
      The Pilgrim's Journey still is threatened by the Foe;
  But to thwart the Ill designed, O stretch to me thy Hand!
      O come, and let it press upon this burning Heart;
  Though Tears my glad Eyes blind, O stretch to me thy Hand!
      Fair Moon, up to thy Palace all shining, I would climb;
  But lest I halt behind, O stretch to me thy hand!


The Priests

XXXIII.

  Love called to Men from Heaven's bright Gate,
  'Who look to God now, soon and late?'
      ''Tis we who look aloft to God,'
  To Love replied the Priests elate.
      Love cried 'How can ye look on high,
  Who thus your Forms and Words inflate?
      Ye cannot see where pure Light dwells,
  So full your Eyes of Greed and Hate.
      Your dark Deeds dim the Noontide's Ray;
  Ye shame the Sun while thus ye prate.
      The Grace that sits enthroned on high,
  Can ne'er its Claim of Faith abate.
      Nor can the Just One justly give
  The Hearing which ye supplicate.
      O ere ye look to Heaven again,
  Put off all earthly Pride and State.
      Your Hearts let Love, not Hatred, rule;
  Then look to God, and on Him wait!'


The Pilgrims

XXXIV.

  The Pilgrims hail the Kaaba's sacred Ground,
  When they at last the holy Fane have found.
      They see a House of Stone, sublime, revered,
  All girt by steep and barren Cliffs around.
      They march'd in Hope expecting God to see;
  For this they toiled, and still their Prayers abound.
      But when all fervent they the Threshold tread,
  They hear a voice from out the Temple sound:
      'Why pray ye thus, O Fools, to Clay and Stone?
  Revere the House for which the Pure are bound.
      The Heart's own House, Shrine of the True, the One:
  O blest are they whose Striving there is crown'd!
      Blest those who tread no Desert's weary Way,
  But rest at Home in peace, like SHEMS renown'd.'[28]

[28] Rosen, whom I have followed in the last two lines, calls this 'an
incomparable Gazel.' Shems-ud-Din (The Sun of Religion) was Jeláleddín's
celebrated Teacher and revered Master, whose name he introduced into his
Gazels instead of his own, whence his Divan became entitled the 'Divan
of Shems of Tabriz.' Rückert, however, substitutes Jeláleddín's own
name, in accordance with Western usage and fact.


Many Faiths, One Lord

XXXV.

  Our House has many Doors indeed,
  But all to One Lord inward lead.
      And all who reach this Lord must pray,
  With Forehead on the Ground, and plead.
      And many in the House born blind,
  The Lord's commands yet hear and heed.
      The Lame there too can Service give,
  They all perform House Tasks at need.
      Yea, even the Wind with panting Breath,
  Comes in, the Hearth's low Fire to feed.
      Each one must do his Part as bid,
  No one can choose his Share or Deed.
      Yet many deem them free, nor know
  The Bond that binds them firm decreed.
      But if thou humbly bear thy Bond,
  It holds a Crown of Flowers in Seed.
      Plight Troth, and Grace will answer Sure,
  For Love's Vow seals the highest Creed.
      Servant! To Fellow-servants shew
  The lowly Mien no Hate will breed.
      Forbearing be! Thy Over-Lord
  No Pleasure hath in Pride or Greed.
      Can one e'er claim to enter bold
  Who Entrance never would concede?
      Who dares to haggle with the Master,
  He drives them from His Doors with Speed.


Love Absolute

XXXVI.

  Love lies not in Book, or Letter, or well reason'd Tome—O no!
  Love lives not in Cell of Penance, nor in gloomy Home—O no!
  From the Green of Spring eternal shoots up the Tree of Life;
  Yet Milkyway and Pleiad reach not Love's Dome—O no!
  Reason dismounts before her, Desire her Charioteer;
  So long the Way no slower to Love's Realm would come—O no!
  While thou art still a Lover, the Longing in thee moves;
  But when thou art the Loved One, thou need'st not roam—O no!
  Wrecked Landsmen shriek in Terror, though saving spars float round;
  The Pilot steeped in rapture, recks not Death's Foam—O no!
  JELÁLEDDÍN, thy soul in Ocean melts in joy:
  Thyself all Consecration, no Novice far from Home—O no!


Renunciation

XXXVII.

  Since he to me his loving Heart has shown,
  I give my Life to him, as All his own.
      The Body's House becomes his Temple now,
  Until the Soul herself to Heav'n hath flown.
      The Earthly Life is Offering far too small;
  Then let the Eternal, silent All atone.
      JELÁLEDDÍN in self-negation found
  The Rose of Life divinely fair, full blown.


All Fulness

XXXVIII.

  Ever shall I more desire
  Than Time's bounded Needs require.
      Ever as more Flowers I pluck,
  Blossoms new gay Spring attire.
      And when through the Heavens I sweep,
  Rolling Spheres will flash new Fire.
      Perfect Beauty only can
  True Eternal Love inspire.


Friendship

XXXIX.

  The Rose is aye Love's dearest, sweetest Sign;
  To my Friend's Heart, I give this Rose of mine.
      Clear Thought dies out in Love's absorbed Delight,
  As Weeds grow pale before the Rose and pine.
      The Rose hides in her Heart the piercing Thorn,
  For deepest hidden Pains with Love entwine.
      The Rose is Beauty perfected in One,
  Her Charms all glowing, Heaven and Earth outshine.
      The full blown Rose in Splendour dims the Sun;
  Each quivering Leaflet shows a Moon's design.
      The Sun's sphered Light is moulded in her Form,
  While bright-eyed Stars keep watch around her Shrine.
      O Sun, the Rose that made the Moon to grow,
  To my Heart's Friend give Love and Joy divine!


The Friend Supreme

XL.

  O what a Friend is mine!
      O what a burning Flame!
  My Heart was parched and dead,
      Till His Breath o'er me came.
  When I before Him fled,
      By Love's Keen Pang distressed;
  He cried, Why dost thou flee?
      Thou art thyself to blame.
  At Night I asked the Moon,
      Where hid my Moon still stayed?
  She said, My Cheek grew pale,
      In Fear when told His Name.
  The Sun, when risen, I asked,
      And why art thou so dim?
  He said, My Eyelids dull
      In Tears have veil'd their Shame.
  And to the Sea I said,
      Why canst thou not be still?
  She answer'd, Deep Unrest
      Will leave me ne'er the Same.
  I cried to Fire, Flame Queen:
      Why flickerest thou So?
  On me, she cried, He looked,
      And quench'd all Earthly Aim.
  I shouted then, O Wind:
      Why hurriest to and fro?
  She gasped, His Breath consumes me,
      Whene'er my Pace I tame!
  But what in me, too, meaneth
      This elemental Strife?
  The Cup in my Hand shaketh,
      And Fever thrills my Frame.
  In Revel's Glow enraptured,
      His Love I know my own:
  Then, come, pour foaming Wine out,
      Till o'er All flows His Name.


Immortality

XLI.

  I am the Bird of Paradise;
  And still my Nest is in the Skies.
      I am the Spirit Falcon, flown
  From Heav'n's Tent, where it open lies.
      But in my eager Chase of Prey,
  I fell to where new Sense Worlds rise.
      I am the Hero of Mount Kaf,[29]
  Who braves the Death the Weakling flies.
      I look on high, until he call
  Me home from this far Enterprise.
      I look up steadfast, searching keen,
  Until my Gaze the Throne descries.
      There all secure my Nest bides near
  The Tree of Life, where Nothing dies.

[29] Simurg. Also the name of the Phoenix (Von Hammer), but according
to Steingass, the Griffin.


The First and Last

XLII.

  Thou art of all Man's Joys the Spring;
  Life's honey'd Sweetness thou dost bring.
      My gather'd Pearls, from Bosom full,
  Before thy Feet my glad Hands fling.
      The Souls love-moved, are circling on,
  Like Streams to their great Ocean King.
      Thou art the Sun of all Men's Thoughts;
  Thy Kisses are the Flowers of Spring.
      The Dawn is pale from yearning Love;
  The Moon in Tears is sorrowing.
      Thou art the Rose; and deep for thee,
  In Sighs, the Nightingales still sing.
      O can my Love me so despise,
  That he my Heart with Pain can wring?
      O Wine of Life, all fragrant, pour,
  And soothe the Pain of Death's last Sting!


Mystic Love Dance

XLIII.

  On with the Dance! We fly upon the Wings of Love;
  We glow in all the Joys and scorn the Stings of Love.
  I heard Love joyous calling from out the Realm of Death;
  Lo! God hath drown'd dark Death now in living Springs of Love.
  The Power of Life that loosen'd my Band when I was born,
  That Hour my Mother gave me the Leading Strings of Love.
  I asked Love's Self, fond nursing: How shall I Love escape?
  She said: There is no Outlet from encircling Rings of Love.
  Love's magic Mirror radiates a Thousand Worlds most fair;
  And wondering Eyes look dazzled on all it brings of Love.
  Thy Body's gold surrender to Love's refining Flames,
  The Gold is Dross till boiling, all pure, it sings of Love.
  I tell thee why the Ocean aye tosses glittering Spray:
  It dances and it glances with Gems, Playthings of Love.
  I tell thee how was Mankind a-formed from Earthy Dust:
  God in the Dust inbreathèd sweet Whisperings of Love.
  I tell thee why the Heavens for ever circle round:
  God's Throne set in the Centre, draws All on Wings of Love.
  I tell thee why the Zephyr at Morn so softly blows:
  To flutter every Leaflet with the Kiss it flings of Love.
  I tell thee why Night hideth in Veil so dark her Face:
  She makes the World a bridal Tent, and darkling sings of Love.
  I can divine all Riddles Creation puts to me,
  For to her Riddles Ever, Man the Answer brings of Love.


Dream Fear

XLIV.

  O Love, the Realm of Dreams
      Is thine; they come, unsought:
  With fiery Weapons, throng'd,
      As if whole Armies fought.
  The Standard of thy Rule,
      Hot Hearts bear in the Van;
  It flames till Worlds, o'ercome,
      Beneath thy Sway are brought.
  Thou, ever and again,
      Sendst out a Phantom Form;
  Till cower weak, trembling Souls,
      Like Children terror-wrought.
  But when a Soul resigns,
      Thou, Victor, marchest in:
  A Conqueror—lovelier far
      Than ever Soul had thought.


The Cry of Love

XLV.

  My Soul sends up to Heaven each Night the Cry of Love!
                                                             Hu! Hu![30]
  God's starry Beauty draws with Might the Cry of Love!
                                                             Hu! Ya!
  Bright Sun and Moon each Morn dance in my Heart at Dawn;
  And waking me in Daylight, excite the Cry of Love!
  On every Meadow glancing, I see God's Sunbeams play;
  And all Creation's Wonders incite the Cry of Love!
  The Turtledove embowered, awakened by my Call,
  Returns to me in coo'd Delight, the Cry of Love!
                                                             Gu! Gu!
  The Crag on whose bare Forehead thy Light in Glory falls,
  Resounds in Echoes clear, aright the Cry of Love!
                                                             Men! Hu!
  For all the Flowers sweet blowing in timid Silence there,
  For deaf Worms, too, I offer God's Rite, the Cry of Love!
  The Ocean's speechless Billows sound ever loud thy Praise;
  And all in rolling Anthems recite the Cry of Love!
  To thee for every Rosebud and every Dewdrop fair,
  And every Gem, deep hidden, I plight the Cry of Love!
                                                             Hu! Ya!
  I, All in All becoming, now clear see God in All;
  And up for Union yearning, takes Flight the Cry of Love!
                                                             Hu! Hu!

[30] Rückert does not give these Exclamations, but Von Hammer does.
Hu!=HE!

Night Thought

XLVI.

  Sleep not, O Thought, my Guest—the livelong Night!
  I bring thee Friendship's best—the livelong Night!
  Thou, like an Angel's Breath, from Heaven hast come,
  To heal me while I rest—the livelong Night!
  Banish dull Slumber, let Heaven's Mystery sing,
  From out his secret Nest—the livelong Night!
  Shine clear, ye circling Stars, that in your Rays,
  The Soul its Vision test—the livelong Night!
  Ye Diamonds, sparkling in your dark Retreats,
  Rival the starry West—the livelong Night!
  Soar up, O Eagle, Sunwards—higher, higher!
  Be still thy Flight up pressed—the livelong Night!
  Thank God, the World now sleeps; alone are God
  And I, all God-possess'd—the livelong Night!
  The Night is calm and deep, and Heaven's own Lyre,
  Sounds soft, as Star-caress'd—the livelong Night!
  War's Turmoil whirling through the starry Streets,
  New spheral Choirs attest—the livelong Night!
  With Lion, Bull, and Ram, all warlike gleam
  Orion's Sword and Crest—the livelong Night!
  Scorpion and Dragon seize the Crown, while weeps
  The Virgin sore opprest—the livelong Night!
  My Tongue sinks dumb with rapture, drunk with Love;
  Now, Thought, brood, silent, blest—the livelong Night!


Up out of Night

XLVII.

  O for Wings to Heaven to soar—
          Up out of Night!
  A Heart to Struggle to Light's Shore—
          Up out of Night!
  Lo! How God's Messengers of Love,
          In dancing Dawn:
  In Life and Light new Worlds restore,
          Up out of Night!
  See in the West how Daylight there,
          Slow Sinking down:
  Looks back, with Love all blushing sore,
          Up out of Night!
  And now in East where she again,
          Doth rise all fair;
  Blooms Rose Dawn, brightening as of yore,
          Up out of Night!
  Time's Memories clear and Life's bright Hopes
          Together twine:
  Hands loving stretch to us once more,
          Up out of Night!
  The Eternal Stars all sparkling ope
          Their radiant Eyes;
  And flash anew deep Wisdom's Lore,
          Up out of Night!
  And ere Heavens full-blown Rose shall fade,
          The endless Day
  Shall rise in Bliss at thy Heart's Core,
          Up out of Night!
  O Nightingale that woos for aye
          The Heavenly Rose:
  Now, now thy deepest Love Notes pour,
          Up out of Night!


All One

XLVIII.

  I looked around, and saw in all Heaven's Spaces: One!
  In Ocean's rippling Waves and billowy Races: One!
  I looked into the Heart, and saw a Sea, wide Worlds
  All full of Dreams, and in all Dreaming Faces: One!
  Thou art the First, the Last, the Outer, Inner, Whole:
  Thy Light breaks through in all Earth's Hues and Graces: One!
  Thou seest All from East to furthest Bound of West,
  And lo! each Leaf and Flower and Tree Crown traces: One!
  Four wild and restive Steeds draw on the World's vast Car;
  Thou bridlest them, and rul'st in all their Paces: One!
  Air, Fire, Earth, Water melt to One in Fear of thee;
  Nor struggle wild, but show in close Embraces: One!
  The Hearts of all that live in Earth and Heav'n above,
  Beat Praise to thee; nor fails in all their Places—One.


O Wake in Me

XLIX.

  When all the World has gone to rest,
                    O Wake in Me!
  When tired Eyes close by Sleep opprest,
                    O Wake in Me!
  When Eyes in Heaven all sleepless watch
                    with Starry gaze,
  Make my blind Orbs thy Home as Guest,
                    O Wake in Me!
  When all my outer Gates of Sense,
                    are shut and bar'd;
  Lest, lone, my Soul be fear-possest,
                    O Wake in Me!
  That no grim Power of Darkness through
                    the Gloom around,
  My deeper Peace and Calm molest,
                    O Wake in Me!
  From Eden's Garden still soft blown,
                    That fragrant Air
  The healing Tree of Life attest,
                    O Wake in Me!
  That once, at least in Dream, Life's Good
                    be here attained,
  The Heart no more by pain distrest,
                    O Wake in Me!
  In the moist Midnight dank and drear,
                    where Shadows creep,
  Lest Passions vile my Heart infest,
                    O Wake in Me!
  And when Life's Night is gone, and Love's
                    new dawning Smile
  Woos me for ever to thy Breast,
                    O Wake in Me!


